# ChenMirman2012_plus_freqSemD
Modification of (Chen &amp; Mirman 2012)[http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0027175]'s neural network models of lexico-semantic processing (see models 5 and 6).
These experiments added a word frequency element in the connection weights between layers and manipulated where sigmoid inhibition occurred--in the word layer, the semantic layer, or both.

## Introduction

Chen and Mirman (2012; hereafter C&M) built a series of simple interactive activation models to provide a unified account for why coactivated representations (i.e., neighbors) are sometimes facilitative and sometimes inhibitory. Their account of semantic neighbors is especially relevant to the current issue of semantic diversity because of the theoretical similarity between semantic neighbors and contextually related semantic information. Semantic neighbors are semantic representations that share a similar meaning or overlap in semantic features with a target representation. In principle, we should expect activation to spread to semantic neighbors just as we should expect activation to spread to representations that are contextually related to a target because both kinds of representations overlap in a kind of semantic feature. Semantic neighbors overlap in the features of the concept’s representation, and contextually related information tends to be coactivated with a target.

In C&M’s model of semantic neighbor effects in visual word recognition, initial activation in a word layer propagates to a semantic layer. Of the eleven words that the model knows, a few are semantic neighbors, which have a set of overlapping semantic units. When a visual word is initially activated, only the target semantic representation is activated. But because the model has feedforward and feedback connections between layers, words with overlapping semantic features become activated as the model steps forward toward a stable representation. Because of a sigmoid inhibition function within the word layer, words with overlapping features inhibit each other as a function of their current activation. Therefore, the weakly activated neighbors inhibit the target to some extent, but the target’s relatively high level of activation inhibits neighbors more and more strongly and the target is always eventually selected. 

C&M’s model of semantic neighbors is especially useful for looking at effects of SemD because it implements competition between active representations and because we can reasonably assume that activation spreads from the target representation to contextually related information in a similar way that it spreads to representations with overlapping features. In this way, C&M’s model provides a tool that was not present in the H&W (2015) model. Thus, I implemented a visual word recognition model of semantic neighbor processing based on C&M (2012) to explore whether adding word frequency would result in activation patterns that approximate the SemD x frequency interaction observed in the database study above.

## Methods

The implemented model was a simple interactive activation and competition model (e.g., McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981). The model consisted of a layer of semantic feature units and a layer of word units. Each of the 11 word units was connected to 10 semantic layer units. Connections between layers were bidirectional and weighted. Positive input in this model drives a unit towards its maximum and negative input drives a unit toward its minimum. Units within the semantic layer were laterally connected by inhibitory connections except where features co-occurred within a word, since those that co-occur are presumed to mutually excite each other. Though the representations were the same as those used by C&M (2012), I considered the co-occurring “features” to be semantic features of a contextual representation rather than semantic features of a word per se. That is, the overlapping features of C&M’s semantic neighbor models were akin to, e.g., the feathers shared by a robin and an eagle, whereas the overlapping features of my model were akin not only to the feathers shared by a robin and an eagle but also to the front yard environment in which one may find both a robin and a tree. Weights within the semantic layer were negative for features that never co-occurred in the model (-0.03); units that sometimes occurred together were connected by small positive weights (0.002), and units that always occurred together were connected by positive weights whose magnitude was a function of the number of co-occurrences (C; e.g., Cree & McRae, 2003; Rogers & McClelland, 2004): 

W(C) =  0.016  + 0.004 * C

Each time the model was run, it attempted to activate the correct representation for a target. A key feature of the model is that words could “overlap” semantically—i.e., their target semantic representations could share some number of units, as would occur if two items shared categorical features or contextual similarities. To represent high and low SemD, I had high SemD targets overlap with more words in the model’s lexicon than did low SemD words. The number of words overlapping with high SemD targets was 8 or 10, and the number of words overlapping with low SemD targets was 0, 1, or 4. Because words likely vary in the degree to which they share semantic or contextual features with one another, the number of overlapping semantic units between words was also manipulated across models to explore its effect. Words could overlap by2, 4, or 8 units, and in every model the number of overlapping features was the same for high and low SemD words. 

Competition was implemented via bidirectional inhibitory connections between nodes, where inhibitory connection strength was scaled by a sigmoid function of unit activation. That is, words activated below a certain threshold (.3) only minimally inhibit the activation of other representations, but inhibition dramatically strengthens if activation rises above the sigmoid function’s threshold. C&M describe this function as similar to Luce’s (1959) choice rule, capturing “the notion of progressively increasing pressure to settle on a single active candidate (Chen & Mirman, 2012, p.420). In the C&M (2012) model, competition was present only in the word layer of the model. However, semantic control theory argues that competition takes places between semantic representations, so I also manipulated whether sigmoid inhibition was present in the semantic layer, the word layer, or both layers.

Word frequency was not present in the semantic neighbor models of C&M (2012), but it was present in their simulation of orthographic neighbor effects. In the latter models, frequency was modified by changing the weights of connections between the word and phoneme layers of the model. In my SemD model, I translated this frequency implementation by changing the weight of connections between the model’s word layer and semantic layer. Because these connections also express the degree to which a target co-activates its competitors, I also gave the target a slightly high frequency than its competitors in every simulation, assuming that the activation that has spread to other representations would be weaker than the target node’s activation.

Each model was run four times, once with each combination of high and low frequency and SemD.
The model’s reaction time was measured as the number of time steps from the onset of the stimulus (start of input to the word layer) until normalized cross-entropy error of activation in the semantic layer dropped below a threshold (0.4). Cross-entropy error measured the difference between the current activation pattern and the target activation pattern, so beyond some low threshold a word could be considered to have been recognized. See H&W (2015) model section for cross-entropy error calculation. Because the model is one of visual word recognition, we can consider the model’s steps toward selecting a word representation as taking place within a word recognition task such as lexical decision. Thinking about the model relative to this task, we would consider successful model performance the selection of a correct word representation, as indicated by the activation of a correct set of semantic units crossing the threshold of cross-error entropy.

Other parameters of the model were as follows: maximum activation, 1; minimum activation, 0; resting activation, 0; semantic decay, 0.1; word layer decay, 0.02; time steps, 100; external input, 0.001; word to word inhibition, .001; semantic to semantic inhibition, 0.0005; between-layer excitation, 0.03; high frequency target weight, 1.36; high frequency neighbor weight, 1.15; low frequency target weight, 0.76; low frequency neighbor weight, 0.51.

## Results

### Baseline model results

For simplicity in discussion, I will refer to the first model tested as the baseline model. This model is treated as the baseline model because it employed sigmoid competition only in the word layer, as was done by C&M (2012). High diversity representations in this model had eight overlapping words and low diversity representations had four overlapping words; all overlapping words had four overlapping units per word. 

The results for the baseline model’s activation over time are shown below. This model activated the correct representation for high diversity words much more quickly than for low diversity words and showed a benefit for high frequency over low frequency in both cases. The baseline model also showed a larger WFE in low SemD words than high SemD words. 

Model effects can be understood via the number of overlapping, “semantically related” words and the number of overlapping semantic units per word. The difference in the speed of activation for high and low SemD occurred because of the high number of overlapping words for high SemD words compared to low SemD words. With any non-zero number of overlapping words, the model activated only the target word representation at the start, but as processing proceeded, activation from the overlapping features between words caused non-target word representations to be weakly activated in the word layer. Activation of semantic representations with overlapping features, in turn, caused stronger and stronger activation of those overlapping features because of lateral excitation in the semantic layer and shared activation by multiple representations in the word layer. Due to the rise in activation strength of overlapping semantic units, the target word unit became more active, first inhibiting other word representations and then causing sufficient activation in the semantic layer for the representation’s cross-error entropy to cross the selection threshold. 

The larger number of overlapping words for high diversity compared to low diversity representations caused activation to rise more quickly and thus caused selection to happen more quickly. Effects of frequency occurred because high frequency exaggerated, and low frequency diminished, the influence of semantic layer activation on word layer activation and vice versa. A smaller WFE occurred for high diversity than low diversity targets because of a floor effect in high diversity words such that activation in high diversity words could only benefit so much from a high frequency boost. The floor effect occurred because of sigmoid inhibition, which effectively limited the maximum change in activation as a function of the number of overlapping words and units, as discussed above. Low diversity words showed no such floor effect because the degree of overlapping words and units did not promote as high a level of activation, and therefore invoked less sigmoid inhibition across processing. 

The beneficial effect of overlapping units can be seen not only in high vs. low diversity in the baseline model but also in results from the manipulations of the number of overlapping words and overlapping units when sigmoid inhibition was in the word layer. RTs were longer compared to the baseline model for low diversity words in model 2, where there was one overlapping word, and RTs were shorter compared to the baseline model for high diversity words in model 4, where there were ten overlapping words. RTs were longer compared to the baseline model for high diversity words in model 5, where there were two overlapping units, and RTs were shorter compared to the baseline model for high and low diversity words in model 6, where there were 10 overlapping units. 

There were two exceptions to the pattern of beneficial effects for overlapping units in models with word-level sigmoid inhibition. The first was seen when the number of overlapping low diversity words set to zero in model 3. In this case, RTs were roughly the same for low diversity representations with zero overlapping words and high diversity representations with eight overlapping words. This exception occurred because when there were no words with overlapping representations, there were no competing word representations activated and thus there was no inhibition of the target word in the word layer. When there are words with overlapping representations, overlapping semantic units activate non-target word-level representations to some extent, whose activation mildly inhibits the target word-level representation, causing its semantic nodes to increase in activation less quickly.

The other exception to beneficial effects of overlapping units occurred when a low number of overlapping units (two) was paired with a low number of overlapping words (four) in model 5. Rather than slowing RTs compared to the baseline model, this model’s low diversity words matched the RT of the baseline model for high frequency words and had a shorter RT than the baseline model for low frequency words. This pattern occurred largely because of the activation pattern in the semantic layer that occurred when only two units overlapped per word. In models with four or eight overlapping units per word, lateral excitation within the semantic layer caused the activation of overlapping target units to rise far above that of non-overlapping target units due to the differential in lateral excitatory weights (e.g., in the baseline model’s high diversity representations, four overlapping units mutually excited each other by a factor of .052 vs. six non-overlapping target units mutually exciting each other by a factor of .02). In models with two overlapping units per words, however, the lateral excitation differential favored non-overlapping target units (e.g., in model 5’s high diversity representations, eight non-overlapping units mutually excited each other by a factor of .02 vs. two overlapping units mutually exciting by a factor of .052). Those semantic units that activate most strongly are the largest factor in lowering the cross-error entropy to threshold and thus having a faster RT.  

In models with high diversity representations with two overlapping units per word, non-overlapping unit activation rose more slowly than did overlapping unit activation in the baseline, four-unit-overlap model. However, in models with low diversity words with two overlapping units per word, the non-overlapping units’ activation rose more quickly than did overlapping unit activation in the baseline, four-unit-overlap model. Two important conclusions come from these results. First, there is a balance between the effects of the number of overlapping units per word and overlapping words such that when the number of overlapping words and units are sufficiently low, the strength of activation in non-overlapping semantic units can promote the correct word level representation more strongly than do overlapping semantic units. Second, lateral semantic excitatory connections play a crucial role in whether high diversity representations are selected more quickly than low diversity representations. High diversity representations are generally selected more quickly because of strong lateral connections, but these strong connections may be less effectual if there are too few of them.

### Models with sigmoid inhibition in the semantic layer

In comparison with the baseline model, models with sigmoid inhibition in the semantic layer showed some similarities and some crucial differences. In models with sigmoid inhibition in the semantic layer, the same RT benefit of overlapping units in representations was observed as that seen in models with word-layer sigmoid inhibition (see model 7 vs. models 11 & 12, and model 13 vs. models 17 & 18). Models with semantic sigmoid inhibition also showed the same pattern of RT detriment when low diversity representations overlapped by one unit (model 7 vs. model 8 and model 13 vs. model 14) and the same benefit when low diversity representations overlapped by zero units (model 7 vs. model 9 and model 13 vs. model 15) as were seen in models with word-layer sigmoid inhibition. 

However, models with sigmoid inhibition in the semantic layer, whether sigmoid inhibition was also present in the word layer or not, showed issues selecting high diversity representations, as seen in the red and blue lines of Figure 6B and 6C. High diversity, low frequency representations were especially problematic for these models, as they rarely passed the selection threshold, even after 100 time steps. In the case of high diversity, low frequency targets, activation of overlapping semantic units inhibited non-overlapping target units toward their minimal activation level. Only toward the last model steps of model 13, which had only semantic sigmoid inhibition, did the correct representation approach threshold, as seen in Figure 6C. This late rise in cross-error entropy was due to the high level of activation of the target and non-target word layer representations. Such a rise in cross-error entropy was not seen in model 7 (figure 6B), which had word-layer and semantic-layer sigmoid inhibition. Activation follows a similar trend in this model to that in model 13, but inhibition in the word layer causes the target word to become the only competitor by the end of processing. Although activation of the target word representation rose toward its maximum in this model, the target word’s activation alone in the word layer was not enough to bolster activation in non-overlapping semantic units. 

Several problematic issues became clear in the results of models with sigmoid semantic inhibition. First, typical adults do not have the degree of trouble comprehending high diversity words that these models showed. Second, target features that did not overlap with non-target representations tended to be de-activated, which does not appear to reflect the reality of experience. Take, for instance, an auditory word-picture matching paradigm, where a person may be asked to look for a picture of a dog among a set of pictures from the category of domestic mammals. That person does not suddenly become impaired at comprehending the differences between dogs and cats, as the model’s results would suggest from the suppression of non-overlapping features. The only models with semantic-layer inhibition in which non-overlapping features returned to a fairly high level of activation were those without word-layer inhibition. However, without word layer inhibition, an untenably high level of activation was seen in non-target word representations. This result suggests a substantial unresolved competition between words that is not consistent with typical word comprehension in, for example, lexical decision, where a benefit is seen for high diversity words.

### C&M (2012) model conclusions

Within the C&M (2012) model architecture, I was able to successfully model beneficial effects of high SemD over low SemD and a larger WFE for low SemD words compared to high SemD words. The benefit for high SemD over low SemD occurred because of the quicker rate of activation of the target semantic representation when there were representations with overlapping features. This result is consistent with theories of semantic and contextual diversity, which assume that such an overlap in contextual semantic features exists (Hoffman, Rogers, & Lambon Ralph, 2011; Jones, Johns, & Recchia, 2012). It is also consistent with our database results above, which show a consistent advantage for high diversity words in single word processing and show a larger WFE in low diversity than high diversity words. WFEs occurred in my models because of the scaling of activation created by word frequency. Because this scaling compounded the effect of overlapping representations but the rate of activation change had a floor, the WFE was smaller in high diversity targets than low diversity targets. Frequency and SemD effects were present in models with sigmoid inhibition—and thus, competition—in the word layer of the model.

Models with semantic sigmoid inhibition—and thus, semantic competition—often did not converge to select high diversity targets and tended to de-activate target semantic contextual features in a way that does not appear consistent with human experience. Thus, these models, like the database analyses above, do not support semantic competition as the mechanism that creates the interaction between SemD and word frequency. 


